Chapter XXII: The Downward Course

306 He who says what is not, goes to hell; he also who, having done a thing, says I have not
done it. After death both are equal, they are men with evil deeds in the next world.

307 Many men whose shoulders are covered with the yellow gown are ill-conditioned and unrestrained;
such evil-doers by their evil deeds go to hell.

308 Better it would be to swallow a heated iron ball, like flaring fire, than that a bad unrestrained
fellow should live on the charity of the land.

309 Four things does a wreckless man gain who covets his neighbour’s wife,--a bad reputation,
an uncomfortable bed, thirdly, punishment, and lastly, hell.

310 There is bad reputation, and the evil way (to hell), there is the short pleasure of the
frightened in the arms of the frightened, and the king imposes heavy punishment; therefore
let no man think of his neighbour’s wife.

311 As a grass-blade, if badly grasped, cuts the arm, badly-practised asceticism leads to hell.

312 An act carelessly performed, a broken vow, and hesitating obedience to discipline, all this
brings no great reward.

313 If anything is to be done, let a man do it, let him attack it vigorously! A careless pilgrim
only scatters the dust of his passions more widely.

314 An evil deed is better left undone, for a man repents of it afterwards; a good deed is better
done, for having done it, one does not repent.

315 Like a well-guarded frontier fort, with defences within and without, so let a man guard
himself. Not a moment should escape, for they who allow the right moment to pass, suffer pain
when they are in hell.

316 They who are ashamed of what they ought not to be ashamed of, and are not ashamed of what
they ought to be ashamed of, such men, embracing false doctrines enter the evil path.

317 They who fear when they ought not to fear, and fear not when they ought to fear, such men,
embracing false doctrines, enter the evil path.

318 They who forbid when there is nothing to be forbidden, and forbid not when there is something
to be forbidden, such men, embracing false doctrines, enter the evil path.

319 They who know what is forbidden as forbidden, and what is not forbidden as not forbidden,
such men, embracing the true doctrine, enter the good path.

