Chapter XXIV: Thirst

334 The thirst of a thoughtless man grows like a creeper; he runs from life to life, like a
monkey seeking fruit in the forest.

335 Whomsoever this fierce thirst overcomes, full of poison, in this world, his sufferings increase
like the abounding Birana grass.

336 He who overcomes this fierce thirst, difficult to be conquered in this world, sufferings
fall off from him, like water-drops from a lotus leaf.

337 This salutary word I tell you, `Do ye, as many as are here assembled, dig up the root of
thirst, as he who wants the sweet- scented Usira root must dig up the Birana grass, that
Mara (the tempter) may not crush you again and again, as the stream crushes the reeds.’

338 As a tree, even though it has been cut down, is firm so long as its root is safe, and grows
again, thus, unless the feeders of thirst are destroyed, the pain (of life) will return
again and again.

339 He whose thirst running towards pleasure is exceeding strong in the thirty-six channels,
the waves will carry away that misguided man, viz. his desires which are set on passion.

340 The channels run everywhere, the creeper (of passion) stands sprouting; if you see the creeper
springing up, cut its root by means of knowledge.

341 A creature’s pleasures are extravagant and luxurious; sunk in lust and looking for pleasure,
men undergo (again and again) birth and decay.

342 Men, driven on by thirst, run about like a snared hare; held in fetters and bonds, they
undergo pain for a long time, again and again.

343 Men, driven on by thirst, run about like a snared hare; let therefore the mendicant drive
out thirst, by striving after passionlessness for himself.

344 He who having got rid of the forest (of lust) (i.e. after having reached Nirvana) gives
himself over to forest-life (i.e. to lust), and who, when removed from the forest (i.e. from
lust), runs to the forest (i.e. to lust), look at that man! though free, he runs into bondage.

345 Wise people do not call that a strong fetter which is made of iron, wood, or hemp; far stronger
is the care for precious stones and rings, for sons and a wife.

346 That fetter wise people call strong which drags down, yields, but is difficult to undo;
after having cut this at last, people leave the world, free from cares, and leaving desires
and pleasures behind.

347 Those who are slaves to passions, run down with the stream (of desires), as a spider runs
down the web which he has made himself; when they have cut this, at last, wise people leave
the world free from cares, leaving all affection behind.

348 Give up what is before, give up what is behind, give up what is in the middle, when thou
goest to the other shore of existence; if thy mind is altogether free, thou wilt not again
enter into birth and decay.

349 If a man is tossed about by doubts, full of strong passions, and yearning only for what
is delightful, his thirst will grow more and more, and he will indeed make his fetters strong.

350 If a man delights in quieting doubts, and, always reflecting, dwells on what is not delightful
(the impurity of the body, &c.), he certainly will remove, nay, he will cut the fetter
of Mara.

351 He who has reached the consummation, who does not tremble, who is without thirst and without
sin, he has broken all the thorns of life: this will be his last body.

352 He who is without thirst and without affection, who understands the words and their interpretation,
who knows the order of letters (those which are before and which are after), he
has received his last body, he is called the great sage, the great man.

353 I have conquered all, I know all, in all conditions of life I am free from taint; I have
left all, and through the destruction of thirst I am free; having learnt myself, whom shall
I teach?’

354 The gift of the law exceeds all gifts; the sweetness of the law exceeds all sweetness; the
delight in the law exceeds all delights; the extinction of thirst overcomes all pain.

355 Pleasures destroy the foolish, if they look not for the other shore; the foolish by his
thirst for pleasures destroys himself, as if he were his own enemy.

356 The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind is damaged by passion: therefore a gift bestowed
on the passionless brings great reward.

357 The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind is damaged by hatred: therefore a gift bestowed
on those who do not hate brings great reward.

358 The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind is damaged by vanity: therefore a gift bestowed
on those who are free from vanity brings great reward.

359 The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind is damaged by lust: therefore a gift bestowed on
those who are free from lust brings great reward.

